Aadhaar Authentication API
1. Introduction
The Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) has been created, with the
mandate of providing a Unique Identity (Aadhaar) to all Indian residents. The UIDAI
provides online authentication to verify the identity claim of the Aadhaar number
holder.
Aadhaar “authentication” means the process wherein Aadhaar Number or Virtual ID or
UID Token, along with other attributes, including biometrics, are submitted to the
Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) for its verification on the basis of information
or data or documents available with it. UIDAI provides an online service to support this
process. Aadhaar authentication service only responds with a “yes/no” and no personal
identity information is returned as part of the response.
1.1 Target Audience and Pre-Requisites
This is a technical document and is targeted at software professionals working in
technology domain and interested in incorporating Aadhaar authentication into their
applications.
Readers should also read the following API related documents for complete
understanding.
1. Aadhaar OTP Request API -
https://uidai.gov.in/ecosystem/authentication-devices-documents/
authentication-documents.html
2. Aadhaar Registered Devices Specification -
https://uidai.gov.in/ecosystem/authentication-devices-documents/
authentication-documents.html
3. Aadhaar e-KYC API - https://uidai.gov.in/ecosystem/authentication-devices-
documents/authentication-documents.html
1.2 Terminology
Authentication User Agency (AUA) and Sub-AUA: An organization or an entity using
Aadhaar authentication as part of its applications to provide services to Aadhaar
number holders. Examples include Government Departments, Banks, and other public
or private organizations. All AUAs(Authentication User Agencies) must be registered
within Aadhaar authentication server to perform secure authentication. Sub-AUA is an
entity having a business relationship with AUA offering specific services in a particular
domain.
© UIDAI, 2022 http://uidai.gov.in/ Page 3 of 34
Version 2.5 (Revision 1) Aadhaar Authentication API
Authentication Service Agency (ASA): An organization or an entity providing
connectivity using private secure network to UIDAI’s data centres for transmitting
authentication requests from various AUAs.
Authentication Factors: Aadhaar authentication supports authentication using
multiple factors. These factors include demographic data, biometric data, PIN, OTP,
possession of mobile, or combinations thereof. Adding multiple factors increases the
strength of authentication. Applications using Aadhaar authentication need to choose
appropriate authentication factors based on risk level of the transaction. AUAs can add
their own factors to strengthen authentication.
1.3 Legal Framework
The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services)
Act 2016was published in gazette notification on March 26, 2016. The Act is to provide
for, as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and targeted delivery of subsidies,
benefits and services to Aadhaar Number holders. A gazette notification was issued by
Central Government on 12th July 2016 to establish UIDAI as an Authority and
operationalize certain provisions of Aadhaar Act 2016. Authentication regulations are
also published under this Act. These documents specify legal framework for
authentication usage, AUA/ASA engagements, audits, and other details. Detailed partner
documents are also published. These documents are available at
https://uidai.gov.in/ecosystem/authentication-devices-documents/authentication-
documents.html
1.4 Objective of this document
This document provides Aadhaar Authentication API (Application Programming
Interface) specification. It contains details including API data format, protocol, and
security specifications.
For latest documents related to Aadhaar authentication, partner guidelines, other APIs,
and related documents, see https://uidai.gov.in/ecosystem/authentication-devices-
documents/authentication-documents.html
© UIDAI, 2022 http://uidai.gov.in/ Page 4 of 34
Version 2.5 (Revision 1) Aadhaar Authentication API
2. Understanding Aadhaar Authentication
This chapter describes Aadhaar authentication, some of the envisioned usage scenarios,
and working details. Technical details follow in subsequent chapters.
2.1 Aadhaar Number
The Unique Identification (Aadhaar) Number gives individuals the means to clearly
establish their identity to public and private agencies across the country. Three key
characteristics of Aadhaar number are:
1. Permanency (Aadhaar number remains same during lifetime of the person)
2. Uniqueness (one Aadhaar number holder has one ID and no two Aadhaar
number holders have same ID)
3. Global (same identifier can be used across applications and domains)
Aadhaar number is provided during the initiation process called enrolment where
his/her demographic and biometric information are collected and uniqueness of the
provided data is established through a process called de-duplication. Post de-
duplication, an Aadhaar number is issued and a letter is sent to Aadhaar number holder
informing the details.
2.2 Virtual Identity (VID) Number and UID Token
Virtual ID is a temporary, revocable 16-digit random number mapped with the Aadhaar
number. VID can be used in lieu of Aadhaar number whenever authentication or e-KYC
services are performed. Residents are currently required to share Aadhaar Number to
authenticate their identity to avail various services. With the introduction of Virtual ID,
a fungible number mapped to Aadhaar Number, residents have an option to share their
Virtual ID at the time of authentication instead of Aadhaar number to further improve
privacy.
UID Token is returned as part of every authentication which is the unique token for that
Aadhaar number holder within that agency. Agencies should use UID token to seed their
database and map to their customer/beneficiary data. This Token will be unique for
each Aadhaar number for a particular entity (AUA/Sub-AUA). This Token will remain
same for an Aadhaar number for all authentication requests by that particular entity.
However, for a particular Aadhaar Number, different AUAs/Sub-AUAs will have
different UID Tokens. The UID Token is an alphanumeric string meant only for system
usage.
More about VID and UID Token are available on UIDAI website. From this document
perspective, it is important to note that VID or UID Token can be used in lieu of Aadhaar
© UIDAI, 2022 http://uidai.gov.in/ Page 5 of 34
Version 2.5 (Revision 1) Aadhaar Authentication API
number within authentication request. In addition, authentication response contains
the UID Token for whom authentication was done so that agencies can store that within
their database or audits.
2.3 Aadhaar Authentication at a Glance
Aadhaar authentication is the process wherein Aadhaar Number (wherever Aadhaar
number is used, in future, an encrypted Aadhaar number may also be used) or Virtual ID
or UID Token, along with other attributes, including biometrics, are submitted online to
the CIDR for its verification on the basis of information or data or documents available
with it.

In all forms of authentication the Aadhaar Number/Virtual ID/UID Token needs to
be submitted so that authentication is reduced to a 1:1 match. In addition, Aadhaar
authentication service only responds with a “yes/no” and no Personal Identity
Information (PII) is returned as part of the response.
Aadhaar authentication provides several ways in which an Aadhaar number holder can
authenticate themselves using the system. At a high level, authentication can be using
Demographics data and/or Biometric (FP/Iris/Face) data, and/or OTP.
During the authentication transaction, the Aadhaar number holder’s record is first
selected using the Aadhaar Number/Virtual ID/UID Token and then the
demographic/biometric inputs are matched against the stored data within CIDR which
was provided by the Aadhaar number holder during enrolment/update process.
2.4 Aadhaar Authentication Usage
Aadhaar authentication enables agencies to verify identity of Aadhaar number holders
using the UIDAI authentication service that is only made available via a private secure
network. Aadhaar authentication service provides services to instantly verify the
identity of the Aadhaar number holder against the available data in CIDR. Based on the
needs of the service, different factors could be used along with Aadhaar Number/Virtual
ID/UID Token. These factors could be combination of biometrics (such as fingerprints,
iris, face impressions) and/or demographic information (such as Name, Date of birth,
Address)and/or a secret PIN (currently not implemented) or OTP (One Time Pin).
For further details on usage of Aadhaar in various service delivery scenarios, refer to
“Aadhaar Enabled Service Delivery” White Paper published on UIDAI website.